\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename bibweb.info
@settitle Bibweb Manual
@c footnotestyle separate
@c paragraphindent 2
@iftex
@tolerance 10000
@end iftex

@comment  use 'perl texi2html -menu -split_chapter bibweb.texi' to get an
@comment  html file

@ifinfo
This is edition 0.50, November 2003, of the @cite{Bibweb
Manual}.  Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2003 John H. Palmieri
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title{Bibweb Manual}

@author (info by John H. Palmieri)

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1997, 1998, 2000, 2003 John H. Palmieri

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``Copying'' is included exactly as in the original, and
provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the
terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage
@page

@ifinfo
@node top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@comment node-name, next,          previous, up
@top Bibweb
@end ifinfo

Bibweb is a perl script written by John Palmieri (in consultation with
Bill Dwyer).

This is version 0.50, November 2003, of the Bibweb manual.  Bug reports
and suggestions for new features should go to
@samp{palmieri@@math.washington.edu}.

This is the first version of this manual; it is done (except for the
indices). 

@menu
* Introduction::                Overview, quick instructions
* How to::                      More detailed instructions
* Installation::                How to install

@detailmenu --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

How to

* La@TeX{} file::               What your La@TeX{} file should look like
* Invoking bibweb::             What bibweb does

La@TeX{} file

* Bibliography command::        What the \bibliography command should look like
* Citations::                   Formats for citations

Invoking bibweb

* Basic operation::             Quick instructions
* Options::                     Options for running bibweb

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@comment in any given node: 
@comment use '@cindex CONCEPT' to add node to concept index
@comment use '@findex FUNCTION' for function index
@comment use '@vindex VARIABLE' for variable index
@comment use '@kindex KEY' for key index



@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Introduction, How to, top, top
@chapter Introduction

Bibweb is a utility for automatically retrieving bibliographical
information from the American Mathematical Society's MathSciNet search
engine (available at @url{http://www.ams.org/mathscinet}).  (In
particular, in order to use bibweb, you must have access to MathSciNet,
which means that you or your institution has at some point shelled out
some quantity of money to the AMS.  Anyway...)

If you're too lazy to go to the library or use a web browser to find out
bibliographical information for that ground-breaking paper you're
writing, then bibweb is the program for you.  It is intended for use
with Bib@TeX{} (which means with La@TeX{}), and you have to write
citations in a particular format, but that's about all there is to it.

Briefly: once you've installed bibweb, if you are editing a file called
@file{bozo.tex}, then you need to insert the following line:

@example
  \bibliography@{bozo@}
@end example

@noindent
If you are also using the Bib@TeX{} file @file{junk.bib}, then you
should use the following line:

@example
  \bibliography@{junk,bozo@}
@end example

@noindent
When you want to cite a paper whose bibliographical information you are
lacking, say ``Periodic phenomena in the Adams-Novikov spectral
sequence'' by H. R. Miller, D. C. Ravenel, and W. S. Wilson, then you
give La@TeX{} the command

@example
  \cite@{miller-ravenel-wilson-periodic@}
@end example

@noindent
or

@example
  \cite@{miller-ravenel-wilson-novikov@}
@end example

@noindent
or

@example
  \cite@{miller-ravenel-wilson@}
@end example

@noindent
or

@example
  \cite@{miller-ravenel;adams-spectral@}
@end example

@noindent
When you run this through La@TeX{}, it won't find the citation (by
assumption); Bib@TeX{} won't find a citation either.  When you run
bibweb, though, by typing

@example
  bibweb bozo
@end example

@noindent
at the shell prompt, then it takes your citation and queries
MathSciNet.  If it finds a match, it writes the bibliographic
information, in Bib@TeX{} format, to the file @file{bozo.bib}.

Bibweb also lets you search for just a single citation, it lets you
specify the names of the input (@TeX{}) and output (Bib@TeX{}) files
separately, and has other options.  @xref{Options}, for details.






@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node How to, Installation, Introduction, top
@chapter How to

In this section, we give detailed instructions for how to use bibweb.

@menu
* La@TeX{} file::               What your La@TeX{} file should look like
* Invoking bibweb::             What bibweb does
@end menu



@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node La@TeX{} file, Invoking bibweb, How to, How to
@section La@TeX{} file

In this section, we describe how to write your La@TeX{} file so that it
will produce output suitable for bibweb.

@menu
* Bibliography command::        What the \bibliography command should look like
* Citations::                   Formats for citations
@end menu

@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Bibliography command, Citations, La@TeX{} file, La@TeX{} file
@subsection Bibliography command

You need to decide where you want to put the bibliographic information
that bibweb will give you; this should be a file ending in @samp{.bib}.
Suppose you decide to use a file called @file{jimbob.bib} (which may or
may not exist at this point).  Then you need the following line in your
La@TeX{} file:

@example
  \bibliography@{jimbob@}
@end example

@noindent
As indicated above, if you already have some other Bib@TeX{} files lying
around, and you also want to use these (say they're called
@file{manny.bib}, @file{moe.bib}, and @file{jack.bib}), 
then you should instead use the following line:

@example
  \bibliography@{manny,moe,jack,jimbob@}
@end example




@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Citations,  , Bibliography command, La@TeX{} file
@subsection Citations

There are two different formats for citations that bibweb knows how to
handle, and it handles them in different ways.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Simpler format:

@example
  \cite@{aaa-bbb-ccc-ddd-year@}
@end example

@samp{aaa} gets sent as the author, @samp{bbb}, @samp{ccc}, and
@samp{ddd} get sent as miscellany (they can match anything, including
the author, title, journal, reviewer, or the text of the review).
@samp{year} should be of the form @samp{<1995} or @samp{>1995} or
@samp{=1995} or @samp{1995}, in which case bibweb only searches for
papers from the appropriate years.  @samp{1995} is treated the same as
@samp{=1995}.  It seems that specifying a year or range of years slows
things down tremendously, so you might want to avoid this.  Also, I
think if @samp{year} is in some other format, it will just get ignored.

For example, @samp{\cite@{devinatz-hopkins-nilpotence@}} matches two
papers: one is ``Nilpotence and stable homotopy theory, I'' by Devinatz,
Hopkins, and Smith; the other is ``Morava's change of rings theorem'' by
Devinatz, for which ``Hopkins'' and ``nilpotence'' are mentioned in the
review.

If you want to avoid the second sort of match, you can use the more
involved format.

@item
More involved format:

@example
  \cite@{a1-a2-...-ak;t1-t2-...-tm;j1-j2-...jn;year@}
@end example

@samp{year} should be just like field @samp{year} in the simpler format,
but it slows things down, so I would avoid it.  @samp{a1}, ...,
@samp{ak} are treated as authors, @samp{t1}, ..., @samp{tm} are treated
as words in the title, @samp{j1}, ..., @samp{jn} are treated as words in
the journal name.  You don't have to include all of the fields.

For example, @samp{\cite@{devinatz-hopkins;nilpotence@}} matches only
the paper ``Nilpotence and stable homotopy theory, I'' by Devinatz,
Hopkins, and Smith.  @samp{\cite@{miller-wilkerson;vanishing-steenrod@}}
matches only ``Vanishing lines for modules over the Steenrod algebra''
by Miller and Wilkerson, as does
@samp{\cite@{miller-wilkerson;vanishing-steenrod;;<1985@}}, as does
@samp{\cite@{miller-wilkerson;vanishing-steenrod;pure;<1985@}} (the
paper appeared in the @cite{Journal of Pure and Applied Algebra}).

@item
Using wildcards:

You can use @samp{*} as a wildcard; for instance,
@samp{\cite@{adams;hopf-invar*-one@}} would return the two papers by
Adams called ``On the non-existence of elements of Hopf invariant one''.

When using MathSciNet by hand, if you want to search for papers by Mike
Hopkins, you could set the author field equal to @samp{hopkins, m*}.  On
the other hand, Bib@TeX{} treats commas as separators: if you give
Bib@TeX{} the command @samp{\cite@{hopkins,m*;global@}}, Bib@TeX{} will
treat @samp{hopkins} as one source and @samp{m*;global} as another.  So
to get bibweb to do the right thing, you should use a period instead of
a comma: use the command

@example
  \cite@{hopkins.m*;global@}
@end example

Bibweb will translate the @samp{.} to a @samp{,} before sending the
query to MathSciNet, so this citation would produce

@example
%% Math Reviews number: 89g:55022 
@@incollection @{hopkins.m*;global,
    AUTHOR = @{Hopkins, Michael J.@},
     TITLE = @{Global methods in homotopy theory@},
 BOOKTITLE = @{Homotopy theory (Durham, 1985)@},
     PAGES = @{73--96@},
 PUBLISHER = @{Cambridge Univ. Press@},
   ADDRESS = @{Cambridge@},
      YEAR = @{1987@},
   MRCLASS = @{55Q45 (55P42 55P60 55Q10)@},
  MRNUMBER = @{89g:55022@},
MRREVIEWER = @{Douglas C. Ravenel@},
@}
@end example

@end itemize




@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Invoking bibweb,  , La@TeX{} file, How to
@section Invoking bibweb

@menu
* Basic operation::             Quick instructions
* Options::                     Options for running bibweb
@end menu






@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Basic operation, Options, Invoking bibweb, Invoking bibweb
@subsection Basic operation

In this section, we give the basic instructions for running bibweb, as
well as a brief description of what bibweb does.

@example
  bibweb @var{file}
@end example

@noindent
will run bibweb on @var{file}.  For example, to run bibweb on the file
@file{elvis}, you type

@example
  bibweb elvis
@end example

@noindent
Then bibweb will run Bib@TeX{} on @file{elvis} and read through the list
of missing citations.  For each such citation, it searches MathSciNet,
and writes its results to the file @file{elvis.bib}.  Once it has done
this, it runs Bib@TeX{} again, to make use of any new citations.  

If bibweb can't find the file @file{elvis.aux} (which it wants to pass
to Bib@TeX{}), it prints an error message and stops.  If it can't write
to @file{elvis.bib}, it should also print an error message and stop.

By ``searches MathSciNet'', I mean that it fires up a web browser that
goes to the MathSciNet site, gives it the appropriate query, gets the
response, and then quits.  In recent versions of bibweb ---
versions 0.50 and later --- it uses a web browser incorporated into
perl.  (Older versions used a program like @samp{lynx} or
@samp{wget} for web browsing.)

By ``its results'', I mean the following:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If bibweb finds exactly one entry matching your citation, it puts it in
@file{elvis.bib} with the key you chose.  For instance, if you have

@example
  \cite@{kan-miller-splitting-spaces@}
@end example

then bibweb puts something like the following in @file{elvis.bib}:

@example
%%   citation 'kan-miller-splitting-spaces' 
%% Math Reviews number: 57 #7582 
@@article @{kan-miller-splitting-spaces, 
    AUTHOR = @{Kan, Daniel M. and Miller, Edward Y.@},
     TITLE = @{Splitting spaces with finite group actions@},
   JOURNAL = @{Topology@},
    VOLUME = @{16@},
      YEAR = @{1977@},
    NUMBER = @{4@},
     PAGES = @{403--407@},
   MRCLASS = @{55C35@},
  MRNUMBER = @{57 \#7582@},
MRREVIEWER = @{J. P. May@},
@}
@end example

@item
If it finds several matches (at most 5), it writes them all to
@file{elvis.bib}, but leaves the original citation undefined.  (The new
ones have citations given by their Math Reviews numbers.)  So at this
point, you have to edit @file{elvis.bib} to change the keys of the
papers you're interested in, or you have to change your \cite command to
match what was written into @file{elvis.bib}.

For example, if you have

@example
  \cite@{serre;faisceaux@}
@end example

@noindent
then there are two matches (or maybe there are three, now), which get
entered into @file{elvis.bib} as

@example
%%   citation 'serre;faisceaux' 
%% Math Reviews number: 35 #3088 
@@article @{MR35:3088,
    AUTHOR = @{Serre, Jean-Pierre@},
     TITLE = @{Prolongement de faisceaux analytiques coh\'erents@},
   JOURNAL = @{Ann. Inst. Fourier (Grenoble)@},
    VOLUME = @{16@},
      YEAR = @{1966@},
    NUMBER = @{fasc. 1@},
     PAGES = @{363--374@},
   MRCLASS = @{32.50 (32.27)@},
  MRNUMBER = @{35 \#3088@},
MRREVIEWER = @{B. Shiffman@},
@}
%% Math Reviews number: 16,953c 
@@article @{MR16:953c,
    AUTHOR = @{Serre, Jean-Pierre@},
     TITLE = @{Faisceaux alg\'ebriques coh\'erents@},
   JOURNAL = @{Ann. of Math. (2)@},
    VOLUME = @{61@},
      YEAR = @{1955@},
     PAGES = @{197--278@},
   MRCLASS = @{14.0X@},
  MRNUMBER = @{16,953c@},
MRREVIEWER = @{C. Chevalley@},
@}
@end example

@item
If there are more than 5 matches, it tells you that, and doesn't add any
new entries to @file{elvis.bib}.  For example, if you have

@example
  \cite@{serre@}
@end example

@noindent
then bibweb adds the following to @file{elvis.bib}:

@example
%%   citation 'serre' 
%% More than 5 matches found. 
@end example

@noindent
You can change the number @samp{5} to something else by using the
@samp{-m} option.  @xref{Options}.

@item
If it doesn't find any matches, it tells you that, and doesn't add any
new entries to @file{elvis.bib}.  For example, if you have

@example
  \cite@{serre-kan@}
@end example

@noindent
then bibweb adds the following to @file{elvis.bib}:

@example
%%   citation 'serre-kan' 
%% No matches found. 
@end example

@item
Occasionally, bibweb will say it only finds one match, but it will add
several things to @file{elvis.bib}.  This happens when there are several
papers whose reviews are all together on MathSciNet (see
@samp{\cite@{dwyer-kan;obstruction-theory-diagrams@}}, for example).  In
these cases, bibweb ought to do a good job of assigning your chosen
bibliographical key to the correct entry, but you might want to
double-check.

@end itemize

Finally, note that if you give the citation

@example
  \cite@{serre@}
@end example

@noindent
and run bibweb, then run bibweb again, it will not query MathSciNet
again; instead it will tell you something like ``You've searched for
`serre' before''.



@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Options,  , Basic operation, Invoking bibweb
@subsection Options

bibweb can be run with several different options.

@table @samp
@item -i @var{file}
@itemx --input=@var{file}
Run Bib@TeX{} on @var{file}.

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output=@var{file}
Write output to @var{file} (after appending @samp{.bib} to @var{file},
if necessary).

@item --std
Write output to STDOUT (the screen, ordinarily).

@item -c @var{citation}
@itemx --cite=@var{citation}
Look up only @var{citation}.  In this case, the output is written to the
screen, unless you also use the @samp{-o} option.

@item -m @var{num}
@itemx --max=@var{num}
Return at most @var{num} matches to each citation.  Actually, @var{num}
is rounded up according to the options available at MathSciNet:
@var{num} will be rounded up to one of: 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 1000.

@item -e @var{site}
@itemx --emath=@var{site}
Search MathSciNet at the web site @var{site}.  The default value is read
from the environment variable @var{MATHSCINET_SITE}; if this variable
hasn't been set, the default is @samp{www.ams.org}.  Some other good
choices are @samp{ams.rice.edu}, @samp{ams.mathematik.uni-bielefeld.de},
@samp{ams.mpim-bonn.mpg.de}, @samp{ams.u-strasbg.fr}, and
@samp{ams.impa.br}---see
the MathSciNet homepage for more information.  If you choose a value for
@var{site} that's not from this list, bibweb prints a warning, but goes
ahead and tries to use it anyway.  You can use a bit of shorthand for
@var{site}: @samp{ams} stands for @samp{www.ams.org}; @samp{rice}
stands for @samp{ams.rice.edu}; @samp{bielefeld} stands for
@samp{ams.mathematik.uni-bielefeld.de}; @samp{bonn} stands for
@samp{ams.mpim-bonn.mpg.de}; @samp{strasbg} stands for
@samp{ams.u-strasbg.fr}; and @samp{impa} stands for
@samp{ams.impa.br}.

@item -sep @var{char}
Use @var{char} to delimit fields in long citation format, instead of
semicolon (;)

@item -lax
Use @samp{%} to comment lines in Bib@TeX{}.  The default behavior is to
use @samp{@@comment} as the comment character -- this is officially
supported by Bib@TeX{}, while @samp{%} is not (although it seems to work).

@item -b
@itemx --bibtex
Produce output in bibtex format (the default).

@item -d
@itemx --dvi
Produce output in dvi format.

@item -p
@itemx --postscript
Produce output in postscript format.

@item -pdf
Produce output in pdf format.

@item -t
@itemx --text
Produce output in text format.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Print a short help message, and then quit.

@end table


For example, any of the following commands

@example
  bibweb -i test -o a -m 10
  bibweb test -o a -m 10
  bibweb -o a -m 10 test
  bibweb --output=a --max=10 test
@end example

@noindent
has bibweb read the file @file{text.aux} and write output to
@file{a.bib}, returning at most 10 matches for each citation.

@noindent
The command

@example
  bibweb --std -m 10 test
@end example

@noindent
reads @file{test.aux} and writes the output to the screen (or whatever
you have STDOUT set to).  The command

@example
  bibweb --emath=ams.rice.edu bozo
@end example

@noindent
reads @file{bozo.aux}, writes to @file{bozo.bib}, and uses
@url{ams.rice.edu} for the MathSciNet search, as do the commands

@example
  bibweb --emath=rice bozo
  bibweb -e rice bozo
  bibweb bozo -e rice
@end example

@noindent
The command

@example
  bibweb --emath=quack bozo
@end example

@noindent
uses @samp{quack} for the MathSciNet search.  In this case, bibweb will
give a warning (since @samp{quack} is not one of the recognized MathSciNet
sites), and will produce no usable results (it will be fast, though).

If you run the command

@example
  bibweb -m 23 -c 'serre'
@end example

@noindent
then bibweb will tell you that it is rounding 23 up to 50, and then it
will look for all articles with @samp{serre} as the author.  In this
case, it will tell you that there were more than 50 matches found.  I
suppose if you typed

@example
  bibweb -m 1000 -c 'serre'
@end example

@noindent
then you would get all of Serre's papers listed on your screen.  This
might take a while.  You could instead run

@example
  bibweb -m 1000 -c 'serre' -o serre.bib
@end example

@noindent
and then the output would be stored in the file @file{serre.bib}.




@comment ---------------------------------------------------------

@node Installation,  , How to, top
@chapter Installation

This is complicated: put the file @file{bibweb} in your path and make
sure it's executable.

That's it.

Actually, bibweb seems to require at least version 5.003 of perl, so if
you have an older version, you may have to upgrade.

And of course, to use bibweb at all, you need to have a subscription to
MathSciNet.

@comment @node    Concept Index,    ,  Previous Node, Top
@comment @unnumbered Concept Index

@comment @printindex cp

@comment 
@contents
@bye
